.. Author: Akshay Mestry <xa@mes3.dev>
.. Created on: Monday, September 09 2024
.. Last updated on: Thursday, September 19 2024

===============================================================================
Open Science Basics
===============================================================================

.. title-hero::
    :icon: fa-solid fa-dna
    :summary:
        Discover the transformative world of Open Science and learn how
        SCHOOL program is empowering researchers and learners to contribute to
        global challenges through open science.

.. tags:: getting-started, open-science-101

.. contributors::
    :timestamp: September 19, 2024
    :location: Chicago, IL

    - Akshay Mestry
    - xa@mes3.dev
    - https://github.com/xames3/

:term:`Open Science` is a global movement that aims to make scientific
research more accessible, transparent, and collaborative. At :term:`NASA`,
we're embracing this transformation through our :term:`TOPS` [#]_ initiative,
which seeks to democratize scientific knowledge and empower individuals from
all walks of life to engage with and contribute to the research process.

The :term:`SCHOOL` program which stands for **Science Core Heuristics for Open
Science Outcomes in Learning** |html-dash| is an essential part of NASA's TOPS
initiative. It provides a structured, immersive curriculum designed to
introduce students, researchers, and science enthusiasts to the core
principles of Open Science. Whether you're just starting out or already
well-versed in scientific research, our mission is to help you harness the
power of Open Science to drive meaningful change.

You are about to embark on a journey into the heart of Open Science |html-dash|
a movement that's transforming how we explore, share, and contribute to
scientific knowledge. At NASA's :term:`TOPS` SCHOOL program, we believe that
science should be accessible to everyone, and we're excited to have you join
this global mission. Whether you're a student, a seasoned researcher, or just
curious about science, you have something valuable to contribute.

At SCHOOL, your voice matters. Your work, your insights, your curiosity
|html-dash| they all play a crucial role in shaping the future of scientific
discovery. :term:`Open Science` is not just about opening doors; it's about
inviting you to walk through them, to take part in groundbreaking work that
has the power to change the world.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A World of Discovery
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

What Is Open Science?
===============================================================================

At its core, Open Science seeks to remove the barriers traditionally
associated with scientific research. In contrast to conventional research
models |html-dash| where data, methodologies, and findings are often limited
to a select few |html-dash| Open Science promotes the idea that all aspects of
the research process should be openly shared and accessible to everyone.

.. dropdown:: Openness means...

    - **Sharing Data.** Making raw data available for others to use, analyze,
      and build upon.

    - **Transparent Methods.** Sharing methodologies, tools, and software
      openly to enhance reproducibility.

    - **Open Access.** Providing access to scientific publications and research
      outputs to ensure that knowledge reaches a wider audience.

:term:`Open Science` promotes transparency, encourages collaboration, and
accelerates scientific discovery by allowing others to replicate studies,
validate results, and build upon previous work. By adopting Open Science
principles, the research community can collectively tackle the world's most
pressing challenges |html-dash| from climate change and environmental
degradation to public health crises and social inequalities.

.. figure:: ../../_assets/banners/doctors-working-together-research.webp
    :class: height-450 object-fit-top
    :alt: Open Science is about sharing knowledge and data for collective
        benefit, making research more accessible to everyone.

    Collaborative Insights. Open Science fosters transparent dialogue and
    collective problem-solving, as experts work together to advance knowledge
    and tackle global challenges. [#image_from_freepik]_

Why Open Science Matters?
===============================================================================

The importance of Open Science goes far beyond academia. In today's
interconnected world, scientific challenges are increasingly global and
complex. Problems like climate change, environmental justice, and natural
disasters demand cross-disciplinary solutions that involve many collaborators.
:term:`Open Science` breaks down silos, enabling diverse teams of researchers,
policymakers, and citizens to work together in solving real-world problems.

.. dropdown:: Reasons why Open Science is vital

    - **Transparency and Trust.** By making research processes visible and
      open to scrutiny, Open Science enhances trust in scientific findings.

    - **Collaboration Across Borders.** Open Science fosters collaboration by
      removing barriers to information sharing, allowing researchers from
      across the globe to work together seamlessly.

    - **Faster Innovation.** Open access to data and research outputs reduces
      duplication of effort, speeds up discoveries, and fosters innovation.

    - **Inclusive Knowledge.** Open Science ensures that knowledge is not
      limited to specific groups or regions, promoting equity in access to
      information and fostering a more inclusive research community.

.. dropdown:: Four key areas where Open Science makes a significant impact [#]_

    .. tab-set::

        .. tab-item:: Accessibility

            - **Citizen Science Initiatives and Engagement:** Open Science
              allows for greater participation from the public, enabling
              citizen scientists to contribute to research efforts and engage
              with scientific discoveries.

            - **Lifesaving Access to Medical and Scientific Information:** Open
              Science ensures that critical medical and scientific information
              is accessible to everyone, potentially saving lives by providing
              timely and accurate data.

            - **Democratization of the Scientific Process:** By making research
              accessible to all, Open Science democratizes the scientific
              process, giving everyone chance to contribute to and benefit
              from scientific advancements.

            - **Increased Earth Observation Accessibility:** Open Science
              expands access to Earth observation data, allowing more people
              to monitor and understan our planet.

        .. tab-item:: Efficiency & Innovation

            - **Cleaner, More Secure Code with More Contributors:** Open-source
              science invites a broader community to contribute to and improve
              scientific software, leading to cleaner, more secure code.

            - **Long-Term Maintenance Assistance:** The open-source model
              encourages long-term maintenance and support from the community,
              ensuring that tools and resources remain up-to-date and
              functional.

            - **New Monetized Offices and Data Centers:** Open Science can
              lead to the creation of new monetized opportunities, such as
              data centers, that support and enhance scientific research.

            - **Transparent Research Spending:** Open Science promotes
              transparency in research spending, making the allocation of funds
              more efficient and accountable.

        .. tab-item:: Reproducibility

            - **Increased Transparency of Research Results:** Open Science
              makes research results more transparent, allowing for easier
              verification and replication of studies.

            - **Reliable Results Through Confirmation:** The open sharing of
              data and methodologies enables other researchers to confirm
              findings, leading to more reliable and robust scientific
              outcomes.

            - **Reduced Pressure for "Exciting" Research:** By focusing on
              reproducibility and transparency, Open Science reduces the
              pressure to produce "exciting" results just to get published,
              fostering a more honest and rigorous scientific process.

            - **More Robust Scientific Products:** Open Science enhances the
              overall quality of scientific research, leading to more
              trustworthy and impactful results.

        .. tab-item:: Diversity & Inclusion

            - **International Accessibility:** Open Science ensures that
              scientific knowledge is accessible to researchers around the
              world, regardless of their location or resources.

            - **Breaking Down Financial Barriers:** Open Science helps to
              dismantle systemic financial barriers, allowing more people to
              participate in and benefit from scientific research.

            - **Diversity Among Researchers:** By making science more
              accessible, open science encourages greater diversity among
              researchers, leading to a richer and more inclusive scientific
              community.

            - **Equitable Distribution of Opportunity:** Open Science ensures
              that opportunities for research and collaboration are
              distributed more equitably, fostering a more inclusive and
              diverse scientific environment.


At NASA's TOPST :term:`SCHOOL` program, we're not just exercising Open Science
|html-dash| we're living it. We are committed to fostering an inclusive
culture where everyone, regardless of background or expertise, has the
opportunity to contribute to the world's most pressing scientific challenges.

You are now part of this mission, and your contributions are **vital**.

Power of Open Science
===============================================================================

:term:`Open Science` isn't just about making research available |html-dash|
it's about making a difference. By participating in Open Science, you are
contributing to a global movement that seeks to democratize knowledge, break
down silos, and create a more equitable world. When scientists, researchers,
and learners like you come together to share knowledge openly, we amplify our
ability to solve complex problems and create a future where science benefits
everyone.

Imagine the ripple effect your contributions could have: a dataset you share
could lead to a breakthrough in environmental protection, the method you
develop could improve public health outcomes, or your insights into climate
change could help shape policies that protect vulnerable communities. Open
Science allows you to play a part in something far bigger than yourself.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
<<<<<<<< HEAD:docs/source/_documentation/_tutorials/_001-basics/open-science-101.rst
========
TOPST SCHOOL Program
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The TOPST SCHOOL program is :term:`NASA`'s bold commitment to fostering a
culture of Open Science. As part of the broader :term:`TOPS` initiative,
SCHOOL is designed to equip learners with the tools, skills, and knowledge
they need to actively participate in and contribute to the Open Science
movement. The program is more than just a training initiative |html-dash| it's
a community. A community built on the principles of transparency,
collaboration, and equity. Our goal is to empower you with the tools,
knowledge, and support you need to not only engage with :term:`Open Science`
but to lead the way in making science more open and accessible to everyone.

In this program, you'll dive into interactive, interdisciplinary modules that
explore some of today's most critical issues: from water systems to climate
change, environmental justice to health and air quality. Each module is
designed to inspire you, challenge you, and equip you with practical skills
you can apply in real-world contexts. As you progress, you'll learn not just
how to access and use open data, but how to think critically about the impact
of your work on society and the planet. The program consists of five immersive
modules, each offering 2.5 hours of interdisciplinary, hands-on learning.

.. figure:: ../../_assets/banners/group-friends-engaging-digital-tools.webp
    :class: height-450 object-fit-top
    :alt: To visually express the global nature of the challenges we face and
        how Open Science enables collaborative, worldwide efforts to address
        these issues.

    Engaged Learning. Students exploring interactive modules and collaborating
    on open science projects, embodying the spirit of inquiry and discovery
    that drives our curriculum. [#image_from_freepik]_

.. dropdown:: Topics Covered in Curriculum  |badge-beta|

    - **Water.** Explore water cycles, the impact of climate change on
      water resources, and how open data can be used to manage these vital
      systems.
      :doc:`Learn more <../../_modules/_001-water-module/water-module>`
      |chevron-right|

    - **Health and Air Quality.** Dive into the science of air pollution and
      its effects on public health, using open datasets to analyze
      environmental health risks. `Learn more <#>`_ |chevron-right|

    - **Environmental Justice.** Understand the intersection between science
      and social equity, and learn how open research can promote environmental
      justice. `Learn more <#>`_ |chevron-right|

    - **Natural Disasters and Climate Change.** Investigate the science behind
      natural disasters and the role of open data in mitigating the impacts of
      climate change. `Learn more <#>`_ |chevron-right|

    - **Agriculture and Wildfires.** Discover how open science principles can
      be applied to address challenges related to agriculture and wildfire
      management. `Learn more <#>`_ |chevron-right|

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
>>>>>>>> 0b06903af23c0b19549f54841fdd12ee5d2b9341:docs/source/_documentation/_tutorials-guides/_001-open-science-101/open-science-101.rst
Getting Involved
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Whether you're passionate about environmental justice, intrigued by climate
change, or interested in public health, the :term:`SCHOOL` program offers a
wealth of opportunities to engage with the world of Open Science. By
participating in the program, you'll gain hands-on experience with open
datasets, learn how to apply :term:`Open Science` principles, and contribute to
solving some of the world's most pressing scientific challenges.

.. figure:: ../../_assets/banners/designers-showing-his-camera.webp
    :class: height-450 object-fit-top
    :alt: To visually communicate the sense of personal empowerment and the
        idea that each participant can contribute something meaningful to
        science and society.

    Shared Perspectives. Just as scientific data is shared openly,
    collaboration and diverse viewpoints enhance our understanding and drive
    innovative solutions. [#image_from_freepik]_

Before diving into the modules, it's important to understand the foundations
of Open Science |html-dash| not just as a concept, but as a movement you are
now helping to shape. Every step you take in this program is a step toward
making science more inclusive, impactful, and accessible to all.

As you learn, we encourage you to think about how you can apply these
principles in your work, in your community, and in your life. By the end of
this program, you will not only have gained new skills but also a deeper sense
of purpose in the scientific endeavor.

.. rubric:: References
    :heading-level: 2

.. [#] NASA launches new `Open Science Curriculum
    <https://nasa.github.io/Transform-to-Open-Science/>`_.
.. [#] NASA's blog post about `Why Do Open Science?
    <https://science.nasa.gov/open-science/why-do-open-science/>`_

.. rubric:: Attributions
    :heading-level: 2

.. [#image_from_freepik] Images by `freepik
    <https://www.freepik.com/images/>`_.

.. toctree::
    :hidden:

    accounts
    workspace
