.. Author: Akshay Mestry <xa@mes3.dev>
.. Created on: Friday, August 16, 2024
.. Last updated on: Monday, September 23, 2024

:orphan:

.. announcement:: We're excited to share this new iteration of our site,
    designed with enhanced automation and a fresh, user-friendly
    interface. Please note that the site is currently under construction, and
    some features may be in development.

===============================================================================
TOPS Universe
===============================================================================

.. title-hero::
    :icon: fa-solid fa-earth-americas
    :summary:
        Join us as we guide you through NASA's TOPST open science initiative,
        a community dedicated to collaboration, discovery, and inclusive
        scientific practices.

.. tags:: getting-started, open-science-101

.. contributors::

    - Akshay Mestry
    - xa@mes3.dev
    - https://github.com/xames3/

    - Alina Zholdubaeva
    - azholdubaeva@my.nl.edu
    - https://github.com/Alinka8/

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
SCHOOL Program
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

**Science Core Heuristics for Open Science Outcomes in Learning**
(:term:`SCHOOL`), is an integral part of |website-tops| Training initiative.
Our mission is to cultivate a vibrant, inclusive culture of open science that
welcomes everyone |html-dash| students, researchers, and curious minds alike
|html-dash| to engage, learn, and contribute to the world of scientific
discovery.

The :term:`SCHOOL` curriculum is a thoughtfully designed program that offers
five immersive, 2.5-hour learning modules. These sessions are more than just
lessons |html-dash| they are interactive, interdisciplinary journeys through
some of the most critical themes of our time. Whether it's exploring the
intricacies of **water systems**, **health** and **air quality**,
**environmental justice**, **natural disasters**, **climate change**,
**agriculture**, or the challenges posed by **wildfires**, our curriculum
weaves together these diverse topics with a common thread, the importance of
`Open Science`_.

.. image:: _documentation/_assets/brands/school-logo.png
    :align: center
    :alt: SCHOOL Main Logo
    :width: 350

The TOPST SCHOOL program is :term:`NASA`'s bold commitment to fostering a
culture of Open Science. As part of the broader :term:`TOPS` initiative,
SCHOOL is designed to equip learners with the tools, skills, and knowledge
they need to actively participate in and contribute to the Open Science
movement. The program is more than just a training initiative |html-dash| it's
a community. A community built on the principles of transparency,
collaboration, and equity. Our goal is to empower you with the tools,
knowledge, and support you need to not only engage with :term:`Open Science`
but to lead the way in making science more open and accessible to everyone.

In this program, you'll dive into interactive, interdisciplinary modules that
explore some of today's most critical issues: from water systems to climate
change, environmental justice to health and air quality. Each module is
designed to inspire you, challenge you, and equip you with practical skills
you can apply in real-world contexts. As you progress, you'll learn not just
how to access and use open data, but how to think critically about the impact
of your work on society and the planet. The program consists of five immersive
modules, each offering 2.5 hours of interdisciplinary, hands-on learning.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Open Science, Open Minds
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

In each module, you'll find a rich blend of lessons that are not only
informative but also transformative. We dive deep into Earth Science
Applications, offering real-world use cases that show you how to access and
analyze vast data sources. These lessons are rooted in the principles of
:term:`FAIR` data management |html-dash| ensuring that the scientific data you
work with is **Findable**, **Accessible**, **Interoperable**, and
**Reusable**. By learning to navigate these open data science lifecycle
workflows, you're not just gaining knowledge; you're acquiring the tools to
make meaningful contributions to the global scientific community.

.. tip::

    The :term:`SCHOOL` program covers a wide range of topics. Don't feel
    overwhelmed if you're new to some of them. Take your time with each
    module, and remember that learning is a continuous process. There are
    plenty of resources and a supportive community to help you along the way.

.. dropdown:: Modules Covered in Curriculum |badge-beta|

    - **Water.** Explore water cycles, the impact of climate change on
      water resources, and how open data can be used to manage these vital
      systems.
      :doc:`Learn more <_documentation/_modules/_001-water/overview>`
      |chevron-right|

    - **Health and Air Quality.** Dive into the science of air pollution and
      its effects on public health, using open datasets to analyze
      environmental health risks. `Learn more <#>`_ |chevron-right|

    - **Environmental Justice.** Understand the intersection between science
      and social equity, and learn how open research can promote environmental
      justice. `Learn more <#>`_ |chevron-right|

    - **Natural Disasters and Climate Change.** Investigate the science behind
      natural disasters and the role of open data in mitigating the impacts of
      climate change. `Learn more <#>`_ |chevron-right|

    - **Agriculture and Wildfires.** Discover how open science principles can
      be applied to address challenges related to agriculture and wildfire
      management. `Learn more <#>`_ |chevron-right|

.. toctree::
    :caption: About Us
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    _documentation/_about-us/vision-mission
    _documentation/_about-us/getting-involved
    _documentation/_about-us/announcements

.. toctree::
    :caption: Modules
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    _documentation/_modules/overview
    _documentation/_modules/_001-water/overview

.. toctree::
    :caption: Tutorials & Guides
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    _documentation/_tutorials/_001-basics/open-science-101
    _documentation/_tutorials/_002-contributing/topst
    _documentation/_tutorials/_003-management/data-management
    _documentation/_tutorials/_004-advanced/advanced-cfg

.. toctree::
    :caption: Community
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    _documentation/_community/contributor-guidelines
    _documentation/_community/upcoming-events
    _documentation/_community/becoming-reviewer
    _documentation/_community/meet-the-team

.. toctree::
    :caption: Open Science Resources
    :hidden:
    :titlesonly:

    _documentation/_resources/external-resources
    _documentation/_resources/glossary
